book/9-develop-sym-debugger/1-架构设计/README.md, before:

## 架构设计

本章开头，我们介绍了调试器在软件开发全生命周期中的必要性，这一节我们将来分析在真实的开发、测试、线上环境中软件调试面临的诸多挑战，包括多平台兼容性、远程调试、安全隔离、性能影响等等。

为了应对这些挑战，现代调试器普遍采用前后端分离式架构，并支持前后端的独立扩展、演进，我们常将调试器划分为调试器前端和调试器后端：
- 前端可以划分为UI层和服务层：
    - UI层可扩展：以方便支持不同的调试界面，如dlv命令行界面、gdlv图形界面或者VSCode中的可视化调试插件；
    - 服务层可扩展：以方便支持本地调试（net.Pipe)，或者远程调试（JSON-RPC)，或者与更多的IDE进行集成（DAP协议）；
- 后端可以划分为服务层、符号层、目标层：
    - 服务层可扩展：略
    - 符号层可扩展：可支持不同的文件格式（ELF，PE，MachO）、不同的调试符号信息（DWARF，COFF，Stabs）、不同编程语言（Go，C，C++，Rust）；
    - 目标层可扩展：可支持不同的操作系统（Windows，Linux，macOS），不同的硬件平台（amd64，arm64，powerpc）；

OK，让我们一起了解下现代调试器面临的挑战，以及如何通过合理的架构设计来解决这些问题吧。Let's Go!

Commit message:

chapter9: translate develop-sym-debugger

book/9-develop-sym-debugger/1-架构设计/README.md, after:

## Architecture Design

At the beginning of this chapter, we introduced the necessity of debuggers in the software development lifecycle. In this section, we will analyze the various challenges faced by software debugging in real development, testing, and production environments, including multi-platform compatibility, remote debugging, security isolation, performance impact, and more.

To address these challenges, modern debuggers commonly adopt a frontend-backend separation architecture, supporting independent extension and evolution of both ends. We typically divide debuggers into debugger frontend and debugger backend:
- The frontend can be divided into UI layer and service layer:
    - UI layer is extensible: to support different debugging interfaces, such as dlv command-line interface, gdlv graphical interface, or visual debugging plugins in VSCode;
    - Service layer is extensible: to support local debugging (net.Pipe), remote debugging (JSON-RPC), or integration with more IDEs (DAP protocol);
- The backend can be divided into service layer, symbol layer, and target layer:
    - Service layer is extensible: (details omitted)
    - Symbol layer is extensible: can support different file formats (ELF, PE, MachO), different debugging symbol information (DWARF, COFF, Stabs), and different programming languages (Go, C, C++, Rust);
    - Target layer is extensible: can support different operating systems (Windows, Linux, macOS) and different hardware platforms (amd64, arm64, powerpc);

OK, let's explore the challenges faced by modern debuggers and how to solve these problems through reasonable architecture design. Let's Go!
