book/7-headto-sym-debugger/7-headto-dwarf/README.md, before:

## 挺近DWARF

前面介绍go标准库debug/dwarf时，我们展示了几个读取DWARF中源文件、函数名、函数参数信息的示例，但是我们没有讨论 ：

1. 这些DWARF调试信息具体是如何生成的？
   我们知道是编译器、链接器生成的，但是具体的生成过程是怎样的，编译器和链接器在这个过程中分别做了哪些工作？
2. 生成DWARF调试信息时具体是利用了DWARF的哪些描述能力？
   针对不同的类型、变量、常量、函数（包括参数、返回值及局部变量）、调用栈、行号表，Go工具链如何用DWARF来描述的？要先理解这部分才能反过来实现正确的读取。
   包括后续调试器实现时，我们可能要经常写一些测试用的小程序片段，检查Go编译工具链生成的DWARF调试信息，理解它然后再尝试去读取它、将它和源码关联起来。
3. go标准库对DWARF数据的读写足够完备吗？
   在前面准备DWARF数据读取的示例时，我们发现并不是DWARF v4里面所有的关键描述信息(.debug_ sections)都有被读取，比如调用栈.debug_frame就没有被读取。
4. 除了go标准库以外，还有没有其他维护更好的Go DWARF开源库？
   比如go-delve/delve这个调试器，几乎是随着go语言发展而同步发展的，这期间go团队对DWARF的支持有限，那delve开发者是解决DWARF数据读写问题的。
5. 实现一个基于DWARF的符号级调试器，有哪些库可以使用帮我们解决DWARF数据的读写问题？
   不同语言的不同程序构造，其DWARF描述也不同，如果从0开始实现DWARF数据读写逻辑，工作量很大。我们要对比下go标准库、delve等项目中的实现来选择合适的库。

这些是咱们理解了调试原理之后，进一步去工程化时必须要思考的一个问题。本节我们就来继续钻研下。

Commit message:

chapter7-*: translate headto-sym-debugger

book/7-headto-sym-debugger/7-headto-dwarf/README.md, after:

## Approaching DWARF

When introducing the Go standard library debug/dwarf earlier, we demonstrated several examples of reading source files, function names, and function parameter information from DWARF. However, we didn't discuss:

1. How exactly is this DWARF debug information generated?
   We know it's generated by the compiler and linker, but what is the specific generation process? What roles do the compiler and linker each play in this process?

2. Which DWARF descriptive capabilities are utilized when generating DWARF debug information?
   How does the Go toolchain use DWARF to describe different types, variables, constants, functions (including parameters, return values and local variables), call stacks, and line number tables? Understanding this is essential before we can implement correct reading of this information.
   This includes when implementing debuggers later - we may need to frequently write small test program snippets to examine the DWARF debug information generated by the Go compiler toolchain, understand it, and then attempt to read it and correlate it with source code.

3. Is the Go standard library's DWARF data reading and writing capability complete enough?
   When preparing examples of DWARF data reading earlier, we found that not all key descriptive information (.debug_ sections) in DWARF v4 is being read, such as call stack information in .debug_frame.

4. Besides the Go standard library, are there other better maintained Go DWARF open source libraries?
   For example, the go-delve/delve debugger has evolved almost in parallel with Go language development. During this time, the Go team's DWARF support was limited, so the Delve developers had to solve DWARF data reading and writing problems.

5. What libraries are available to help us handle DWARF data reading and writing when implementing a DWARF-based symbolic debugger?
   Different language constructs in different programming languages have different DWARF descriptions. Implementing DWARF data reading and writing logic from scratch would be a massive undertaking. We need to compare implementations in the Go standard library, Delve and other projects to choose suitable libraries.

These are questions we must consider when moving towards engineering implementation after understanding debugging principles. Let's continue to explore these topics in this section.
