book/6-develop-inst-debugger/13-pregs.md, before:

## 查看进程状态(寄存器)

### 实现目标：pregs查看寄存器

这一小节，我们来实现pregs命令，方便调试进程时查看进程寄存器数据。对于指令级调试而言，我们通过反汇编看到待执行的汇编指令，为了搞清楚指令的操作数，我们需要借助pmem来查看内存数据，也需要pregs来查看寄存器数据。这就好比符号级调试器看到源码后需要知道对应的变量值一样。

在前面章节中我们已经不止一次使用 `ptrace(PTRACE_GETREGS,...)` 获取寄存器数据了，这里我们需要单独支持一个pregs的调试命令，每次执行该命令打印出当前所有寄存器的信息，我们就不像gdb那样支持单独打印某个寄存器的信息了。

> ps：指令级调试门槛是有点高的，至少要懂汇编语言，或者在某些工具帮助下能看得懂汇编语言，也有些工具支持从指令数据还原出对应的高级语言源码，如生成对应的C程序，但是因为变量名、函数名问题即使生成了可读性也比较差，只能看程序组织、调用方式。在这个过程中，不同处理器对应的寄存器也不一样，比如i386、amd64、arm64等，这要求开发人员必须参考并了解相关的细节才能顺利调试。

### 代码实现

查看进程寄存器数据，需要通过 `ptrace(PTRACE_GETREGS,...)` 操作来读取被调试进程的寄存器数据。

**file: cmd/debug/pregs.go**

```go
package debug

import (
	"fmt"
	"os"
	"reflect"
	"syscall"
	"text/tabwriter"

	"github.com/spf13/cobra"
)

var pregsCmd = &cobra.Command{
	Use:   "pregs",
	Short: "打印寄存器数据",
	Annotations: map[string]string{
		cmdGroupKey: cmdGroupInfo,
	},
	RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
		regsOut := syscall.PtraceRegs{}
		err := syscall.PtraceGetRegs(TraceePID, &regsOut)
		if err != nil {
			return fmt.Errorf("get regs error: %v", err)
		}
		prettyPrintRegs(regsOut)
		return nil
	},
}

func init() {
	debugRootCmd.AddCommand(pregsCmd)
}

func prettyPrintRegs(regs syscall.PtraceRegs) {
	w := tabwriter.NewWriter(os.Stdout, 0, 8, 4, ' ', 0)
	rt := reflect.TypeOf(regs)
	rv := reflect.ValueOf(regs)
	for i := 0; i < rv.NumField(); i++ {
		fmt.Fprintf(w, "Register\t%s\t%#x\t\n", rt.Field(i).Name, rv.Field(i).Uint())
	}
	w.Flush()
}
```

程序首先通过ptrace获取寄存器数据，然后通过prettyPrintRegs打印寄存器信息。其中，prettyPrintRegs函数使用了 `tabwriter`对寄存器数据按样式“**Register	寄存器名	寄存器值**”格式化输出，便于查看。

> tabwrite对于需要输出多行、多列数据且需要对每列数据进行对齐的场景非常适用。

### 代码测试

首先启动一个测试程序充当被调试进程，获取其pid，然后通过 `godbg attach <pid>`对目标进程进行调试。等调试会话准备就绪后，输入命令pregs查看寄存器信息。

```bash
$ godbg attach 116
process 116 attached succ
process 116 stopped: true
godbg> pregs
Register    R15         0x400             
Register    R14         0x3               
Register    R13         0xa               
Register    R12         0x4be86f          
Register    Rbp         0x7ffc5095bd50    
Register    Rbx         0x555900          
Register    R11         0x286             
Register    R10         0x0               
Register    R9          0x0               
Register    R8          0x0               
Register    Rax         0xfffffffffffffe00  
Register    Rcx         0x464fc3          
Register    Rdx         0x0               
Register    Rsi         0x80              
Register    Rdi         0x555a48          
Register    Orig_rax    0xca              
Register    Rip         0x464fc3          
Register    Cs          0x33              
Register    Eflags      0x286             
Register    Rsp         0x7ffc5095bd08    
Register    Ss          0x2b              
Register    Fs_base     0x555990          
Register    Gs_base     0x0               
Register    Ds          0x0               
Register    Es          0x0               
Register    Fs          0x0               
Register    Gs          0x0               
godbg> 
```

我们看到pregs命令显示了三列数据：

- 第1列统一为Register，没有什么特殊含义，只是为了可读性和美观性；
- 第2列为寄存器名称，为了美观采用了左对齐；
- 第3列为寄存器当前值，采用16进制数打印，为了美观采用了左对齐；

调试过程中有时需要查看、修改寄存器状态，比如查看、修改返回值（返回值通常记录在rax寄存器中，但是go语言支持多值返回，对返回值的处理有点特殊之处）。

### 本文小结

截止到目前我们实现了pmem、pregs这两个查看内存、查看寄存器数据的命令，只查看还不够，我们还应该实现修改内存数据、修改寄存器数据的操作，我们会在后面小节介绍。

Commit message:

chapter6-*: translate chapter develop-inst-debugger

book/6-develop-inst-debugger/13-pregs.md, after:

## Viewing Process State (Registers)

### Implementation Goal: pregs Viewing Registers

In this section, we will implement the `pregs` command to facilitate viewing process register data during debugging. For instruction-level debugging, we see the assembly instructions to be executed through disassembly. To understand the operands of the instructions, we need to use `pmem` to view memory data and `pregs` to view register data. This is similar to how a symbol-level debugger needs to know the corresponding variable values after seeing the source code.

In previous chapters, we have used `ptrace(PTRACE_GETREGS,...)` multiple times to obtain register data. Here, we need to support a separate `pregs` debugging command that prints out the current information of all registers each time it is executed. Unlike gdb, we do not support printing the information of a single register.

> ps: Instruction-level debugging has a relatively high threshold; at least, one needs to understand assembly language or be able to understand it with the help of certain tools. Some tools also support restoring the corresponding high-level language source code from instruction data, such as generating a corresponding C program. However, due to issues with variable names and function names, even if generated, the readability is poor, and one can only see the program organization and calling methods. In this process, different processors correspond to different registers, such as i386, amd64, arm64, etc., which requires developers to refer to and understand the relevant details to debug smoothly.

### Code Implementation

To view process register data, we need to use the `ptrace(PTRACE_GETREGS,...)` operation to read the register data of the debugged process.

**file: cmd/debug/pregs.go**

```go
package debug

import (
	"fmt"
	"os"
	"reflect"
	"syscall"
	"text/tabwriter"

	"github.com/spf13/cobra"
)

var pregsCmd = &cobra.Command{
	Use:   "pregs",
	Short: "Print register data",
	Annotations: map[string]string{
		cmdGroupKey: cmdGroupInfo,
	},
	RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
		regsOut := syscall.PtraceRegs{}
		err := syscall.PtraceGetRegs(TraceePID, &regsOut)
		if err != nil {
			return fmt.Errorf("get regs error: %v", err)
		}
		prettyPrintRegs(regsOut)
		return nil
	},
}

func init() {
	debugRootCmd.AddCommand(pregsCmd)
}

func prettyPrintRegs(regs syscall.PtraceRegs) {
	w := tabwriter.NewWriter(os.Stdout, 0, 8, 4, ' ', 0)
	rt := reflect.TypeOf(regs)
	rv := reflect.ValueOf(regs)
	for i := 0; i < rv.NumField(); i++ {
		fmt.Fprintf(w, "Register\t%s\t%#x\t\n", rt.Field(i).Name, rv.Field(i).Uint())
	}
	w.Flush()
}
```

The program first obtains register data through ptrace, then prints the register information using `prettyPrintRegs`. The `prettyPrintRegs` function uses `tabwriter` to format the register data in the style "**Register	Register Name	Register Value**" for easy viewing.

> `tabwriter` is very suitable for scenarios where multiple rows and columns of data need to be output and each column of data needs to be aligned.

### Code Testing

First, start a test program to act as the debugged process, get its pid, then use `godbg attach <pid>` to debug the target process. Once the debug session is ready, enter the `pregs` command to view the register information.

```bash
$ godbg attach 116
process 116 attached succ
process 116 stopped: true
godbg> pregs
Register    R15         0x400             
Register    R14         0x3               
Register    R13         0xa               
Register    R12         0x4be86f          
Register    Rbp         0x7ffc5095bd50    
Register    Rbx         0x555900          
Register    R11         0x286             
Register    R10         0x0               
Register    R9          0x0               
Register    R8          0x0               
Register    Rax         0xfffffffffffffe00  
Register    Rcx         0x464fc3          
Register    Rdx         0x0               
Register    Rsi         0x80              
Register    Rdi         0x555a48          
Register    Orig_rax    0xca              
Register    Rip         0x464fc3          
Register    Cs          0x33              
Register    Eflags      0x286             
Register    Rsp         0x7ffc5095bd08    
Register    Ss          0x2b              
Register    Fs_base     0x555990          
Register    Gs_base     0x0               
Register    Ds          0x0               
Register    Es          0x0               
Register    Fs          0x0               
Register    Gs          0x0               
godbg> 
```

We see that the `pregs` command displays three columns of data:

- The first column is uniformly "Register," which has no special meaning, just for readability and aesthetics;
- The second column is the register name, left-aligned for aesthetics;
- The third column is the current value of the register, printed in hexadecimal, left-aligned for aesthetics;

During debugging, it is sometimes necessary to view and modify register states, such as viewing and modifying return values (return values are usually recorded in the rax register, but Go language supports multiple return values, which has some special handling).

### Summary

So far, we have implemented the `pmem` and `pregs` commands for viewing memory and register data. However, just viewing is not enough; we should also implement operations to modify memory data and register data, which we will introduce in later sections.
