book/6-develop-inst-debugger/7-breakpoints.md, before:

## 动态断点

### 实现目标：列出断点

前一节中我们实现了动态断点的添加，为了能够支持移除断点，我们必须为断点提供一些描述信息，比如断点编号，这样用户可以借助断点编号来移除断点。

比如依次添加了3个断点，每个断点依次编号为 `1、2、3`，当用户希望移除断点2时，可以通过执行命令 `clear -n 2`来移除。

当然添加的断点数量多了之后，我们很难记得清楚自己添加了多少个断点，每个断点对应的指令地址是什么，添加顺序（编号）是什么，所以我们还必须提供一个列出已添加断点的功能，如执行 `breakpoints`会列出所有已添加断点。

展示样式大致如下所示，至少要显示断点编号，对应指令地址，以及源码位置。

```bash
godbg> breakpoints
breakpoint[1] 0x4000001 main.go:10
breakpoint[2] 0x5000001 hello.go:20
breakpoint[3] 0x5000101 world.go:30
```

### 代码实现

#### 微调代码：新增断点时记录编号及位置

我们需要对前一节添加断点的部分代码进行适当修改，在添加断点时能够同时记录断点的编号、指令地址、源码位置（源码位置我们先用空串表示）。

**file: cmd/debug/break.go**

```go
package debug

var breakCmd = &cobra.Command{
	RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
		...
		breakpoint, err := target.NewBreakpoint(addr, orig[0], "")
		if err != nil {
			return fmt.Errorf("add breakpoint error: %v", err)
		}
		breakpoints[addr] = &breakpoint
    ...
	},
}

func init() {
	debugRootCmd.AddCommand(breakCmd)
}
```

**file: target/breakpoint.go**

```go
func NewBreakpoint(addr uintptr, orig byte, location string) (Breakpoint, error) {
	b := Breakpoint{
		ID:       seqNo.Add(1),
		Addr:     addr,
		Orig:     orig,
		Location: location,
	}
	return b, nil
}
```

#### 新增命令：breakpoints显示断点列表

我们新增一个调试命令breakpoints，用名词复数形式来隐含表示查询所有断点的意思。实现逻辑就比较简单，我们遍历所有已添加的断点，逐个输出断点信息即可。

> `breakpoints` 操作实现比较简单，我们没有在 [hitzhangjie/golang-debug-lessons](https://github.com/hitzhangjie/golang-debug-lessons) 中单独提供示例目录，而是在 [hitzhangjie/godbg](https://github.com/hitzhangjie/godbg) 中进行了实现，读者可以查看 godbg 的源码。
> TODO 代码示例可以优化一下, see: https://github.com/hitzhangjie/golang-debugger-book/issues/15

**file: cmd/debug/breakpoints.go**

```go
package debug

import (
	"fmt"
	"sort"

	"godbg/target"

	"github.com/spf13/cobra"
)

var breaksCmd = &cobra.Command{
	Use:     "breaks",
	Short:   "列出所有断点",
	Long:    "列出所有断点",
	Aliases: []string{"bs", "breakpoints"},
	Annotations: map[string]string{
		cmdGroupKey: cmdGroupBreakpoints,
	},
	RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {

		bs := target.Breakpoints{}
		for _, b := range breakpoints {
			bs = append(bs, *b)
		}
		sort.Sort(bs)

		for _, b := range bs {
			fmt.Printf("breakpoint[%d] %#x %s\n", b.ID, b.Addr, b.Location)
		}
		return nil
	},
}

func init() {
	debugRootCmd.AddCommand(breaksCmd)
}
```

新增断点记录在一个 `map[uintptr]*breakpoint`结构中，这里用map主要是考虑到后续插入、删除、查询的场景，有助于提升查询效率，比如重复执行 `break main.go:10`多次，首先将main.go:10转成指令地址，然后查询此map结构，可以以O(1)的时间复杂度来判断此断点是否已经存在。

上述map的key是断点的指令地址，value是断点描述信息struct，如果我们直接通过for-range来遍历map的kv然后输出其信息，那断点展示的顺序不一定就是按照断点编号。

为了能够保证断点展示的顺序能够按照编号有序展示，我们需要对断点切片Breakpoints实现 `sort.Interface{}`接口，允许其通过编号进行排序。

**file: target/breakpoint.go**

```go
package target

import (
	"go.uber.org/atomic"
)

var (
  // 断点编号
	seqNo = atomic.NewUint64(0)
)

// Breakpoint 断点
type Breakpoint struct {
	ID       uint64
	Addr     uintptr
	Orig     byte
	Location string
}

// Breakpoints 断点切片，实现了排序接口
type Breakpoints []Breakpoint

func (b Breakpoints) Len() int {
	return len(b)
}

func (b Breakpoints) Less(i, j int) bool {
	if b[i].ID <= b[j].ID {
		return true
	}
	return false
}

func (b Breakpoints) Swap(i, j int) {
	b[i], b[j] = b[j], b[i]
}
```

这样，我们既可以通过 `sort.Sort(bs)`对现有断点按照编号进行排序，然后再遍历输出断点信息即可。

基于命令行的调试器，实际调试经历来看，查看断点列表、新增断点、删除断点，相对来说也是比较频繁的。存储所有断点信息使用map和slice相比，新增、删除、查询都更方便，编码也方便 :)

### 代码测试

我们先运行一个测试程序，查看其pid，然后通过 `godbg attach <pid>`对目标进程进行调试，当调试会话准备好之后，我们通过 `disass`反汇编查看其汇编指令列表以及指令地址，然后通过 `break <locspec>`来添加多个断点，并通过 `breakpoints`or `breaks`来显示已添加的断点列表。

```bash
godbg> disass
...
0x4653a6 INT 0x3                                          ; add breakpoint here
0x4653a7 MOV [RSP+Reg(0)+0x40], AL
0x4653ab MOV RCX, RSP                                     ; add breakpoint here
0x4653ae INT 0x3
0x4653af AND [RAX-0x7d], CL
0x4653b2 Prefix(0xc4) Prefix(0x28) Prefix(0xc3) INT 0x3
0x4653b6 MOV EAX, [RSP+Reg(0)+0x30]
0x4653ba ADD RAX, 0x8
0x4653be INT 0x3
0x4653bf MOV [RSP+Reg(0)], EAX
0x4653c2 REX.W Op(0)
...
godbg> b 0x4653a6
break 0x4653a6
添加断点成功
godbg> b 0x4653ab
break 0x4653ab
添加断点成功
godbg> breakpoints
breakpoint[1] 0x4653a6 
breakpoint[2] 0x4653ab 
godbg> 
```

我们可以看到添加了断点之后，breakpoints命令正常显示了断点列表。

```bash
godbg> breakpoints
breakpoint[1] 0x4653a6 
breakpoint[2] 0x4653ab 
```

这里的编号1、2将用来作为断点标识用以移除断点，我们将在clear命令中描述这点。

> ps: 和上一小节类似，目前添加断点 `break <locspec>`，列出断点 `breakpoints`，locspec的形式目前仅支持内存地址的形式，还不支持源码位置。我们将在后续实现符号级调试器时解决此问题。

Commit message:

chapter6-*: translate chapter develop-inst-debugger

book/6-develop-inst-debugger/7-breakpoints.md, after:

## Dynamic Breakpoints

### Implementation Goal: Listing Breakpoints

In the previous section, we implemented dynamic breakpoint addition. To support breakpoint removal, we must provide some descriptive information for breakpoints, such as breakpoint numbers, so users can remove breakpoints using their numbers.

For example, if three breakpoints are added in sequence, numbered `1, 2, 3` respectively, when a user wants to remove breakpoint 2, they can do so by executing the command `clear -n 2`.

Of course, after adding many breakpoints, it becomes difficult to remember how many breakpoints we've added, what instruction addresses they correspond to, and their order (numbers). Therefore, we must also provide a function to list all added breakpoints, such as executing `breakpoints` to list all breakpoints.

The display format should look something like this, showing at least the breakpoint number, corresponding instruction address, and source code location.

```bash
godbg> breakpoints
breakpoint[1] 0x4000001 main.go:10
breakpoint[2] 0x5000001 hello.go:20
breakpoint[3] 0x5000101 world.go:30
```

### Code Implementation

#### Code Adjustment: Recording Number and Location When Adding Breakpoints

We need to make appropriate modifications to the breakpoint addition code from the previous section to record the breakpoint number, instruction address, and source code location (we'll use an empty string for source location for now) when adding a breakpoint.

**file: cmd/debug/break.go**

```go
package debug

var breakCmd = &cobra.Command{
	RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
		...
		breakpoint, err := target.NewBreakpoint(addr, orig[0], "")
		if err != nil {
			return fmt.Errorf("add breakpoint error: %v", err)
		}
		breakpoints[addr] = &breakpoint
    ...
	},
}

func init() {
	debugRootCmd.AddCommand(breakCmd)
}
```

**file: target/breakpoint.go**

```go
func NewBreakpoint(addr uintptr, orig byte, location string) (Breakpoint, error) {
	b := Breakpoint{
		ID:       seqNo.Add(1),
		Addr:     addr,
		Orig:     orig,
		Location: location,
	}
	return b, nil
}
```

#### New Command: breakpoints to Display Breakpoint List

We add a new debugging command `breakpoints`, using the plural noun form to imply querying all breakpoints. The implementation logic is quite simple - we just need to iterate through all added breakpoints and output their information.

> The `breakpoints` operation is relatively simple to implement. We haven't provided a separate example directory in [hitzhangjie/golang-debug-lessons](https://github.com/hitzhangjie/golang-debug-lessons), but instead implemented it in [hitzhangjie/godbg](https://github.com/hitzhangjie/godbg). Readers can check the source code of godbg.
> TODO Code example can be optimized, see: https://github.com/hitzhangjie/golang-debugger-book/issues/15

**file: cmd/debug/breakpoints.go**

```go
package debug

import (
	"fmt"
	"sort"

	"godbg/target"

	"github.com/spf13/cobra"
)

var breaksCmd = &cobra.Command{
	Use:     "breaks",
	Short:   "List all breakpoints",
	Long:    "List all breakpoints",
	Aliases: []string{"bs", "breakpoints"},
	Annotations: map[string]string{
		cmdGroupKey: cmdGroupBreakpoints,
	},
	RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {

		bs := target.Breakpoints{}
		for _, b := range breakpoints {
			bs = append(bs, *b)
		}
		sort.Sort(bs)

		for _, b := range bs {
			fmt.Printf("breakpoint[%d] %#x %s\n", b.ID, b.Addr, b.Location)
		}
		return nil
	},
}

func init() {
	debugRootCmd.AddCommand(breaksCmd)
}
```

New breakpoints are recorded in a `map[uintptr]*breakpoint` structure. We use a map here mainly considering the scenarios of insertion, deletion, and querying, which helps improve query efficiency. For example, when executing `break main.go:10` multiple times, we first convert main.go:10 to an instruction address, then query this map structure, which allows us to determine if this breakpoint already exists in O(1) time complexity.

In the above map, the key is the breakpoint's instruction address, and the value is the breakpoint description struct. If we directly iterate through the map's key-value pairs using for-range and output their information, the breakpoint display order might not be according to the breakpoint numbers.

To ensure that breakpoints are displayed in order by their numbers, we need to implement the `sort.Interface{}` interface for the breakpoint slice Breakpoints, allowing it to be sorted by number.

**file: target/breakpoint.go**

```go
package target

import (
	"go.uber.org/atomic"
)

var (
  // Breakpoint number
	seqNo = atomic.NewUint64(0)
)

// Breakpoint represents a breakpoint
type Breakpoint struct {
	ID       uint64
	Addr     uintptr
	Orig     byte
	Location string
}

// Breakpoints is a slice of breakpoints that implements the sorting interface
type Breakpoints []Breakpoint

func (b Breakpoints) Len() int {
	return len(b)
}

func (b Breakpoints) Less(i, j int) bool {
	if b[i].ID <= b[j].ID {
		return true
	}
	return false
}

func (b Breakpoints) Swap(i, j int) {
	b[i], b[j] = b[j], b[i]
}
```

This way, we can sort existing breakpoints by number using `sort.Sort(bs)`, then iterate through and output the breakpoint information.

Based on actual debugging experience with command-line debuggers, viewing the breakpoint list, adding breakpoints, and deleting breakpoints are relatively frequent operations. Using a map and slice to store all breakpoint information makes adding, deleting, and querying more convenient, and the coding is also easier :)

### Code Testing

First, we run a test program, check its pid, then use `godbg attach <pid>` to debug the target process. After the debugging session is ready, we use `disass` to view the assembly instruction list and instruction addresses, then add multiple breakpoints using `break <locspec>`, and display the list of added breakpoints using `breakpoints` or `breaks`.

```bash
godbg> disass
...
0x4653a6 INT 0x3                                          ; add breakpoint here
0x4653a7 MOV [RSP+Reg(0)+0x40], AL
0x4653ab MOV RCX, RSP                                     ; add breakpoint here
0x4653ae INT 0x3
0x4653af AND [RAX-0x7d], CL
0x4653b2 Prefix(0xc4) Prefix(0x28) Prefix(0xc3) INT 0x3
0x4653b6 MOV EAX, [RSP+Reg(0)+0x30]
0x4653ba ADD RAX, 0x8
0x4653be INT 0x3
0x4653bf MOV [RSP+Reg(0)], EAX
0x4653c2 REX.W Op(0)
...
godbg> b 0x4653a6
break 0x4653a6
Breakpoint added successfully
godbg> b 0x4653ab
break 0x4653ab
Breakpoint added successfully
godbg> breakpoints
breakpoint[1] 0x4653a6 
breakpoint[2] 0x4653ab 
godbg> 
```

We can see that after adding breakpoints, the breakpoints command correctly displays the breakpoint list.

```bash
godbg> breakpoints
breakpoint[1] 0x4653a6 
breakpoint[2] 0x4653ab 
```

The numbers 1 and 2 here will be used as breakpoint identifiers for removing breakpoints, which we'll describe in the clear command.

> ps: Similar to the previous section, currently adding breakpoints `break <locspec>` and listing breakpoints `breakpoints`, the locspec format only supports memory addresses and doesn't yet support source code locations. We'll solve this issue when implementing the symbol-level debugger later.
